## Use a Desktop First Workflow

Mobile First seems to be all the rage, but if you are getting started I am going to recommend using a Desktop First workflow.

I am a huge advocate of Mobile First design and philosophy, however, it does not always translate well to all projects. It is important to consider you target market and specific use cases before taking such a radical approach.

Desktop First, on the other hand, has been used to develop just about every website since the dawn of the web. It is exactly as it sounds, you start by designing for a Desktop browser and then do refinement (or sometimes called progressive enhancement) for the mobile and tablet grids.

I have found for my projects I almost always follow this process when working desktop first.

First Phase: focused on structure, use default components wherever possible, basic “theming”

1. Desktop Pass - 85% of time
2. Mobile Refinement - 12% of time
3. Tablet Refinement - 3% or less of time

Second Phase: pixel perfect stage, working mostly in CSS, custom classes, visibility blocks

1. Desktop Pass - 50%
2. Mobile Pass - 49%
3. Tablet Pass - 1%

The First Phase is critical so that you have a good structure to build on. If you were painting, this is painting the entire canvas one color and starting to block in large shapes. In both cases it is important to make good decisions because you can make things either very easy or very difficult by the decisions you make here.

Now the difficult thing at the end of the First Phase, is even though you might set your variables and change the colors for your branding, your site is still going to look “Foundationy.” By “Foundationy” I mean it is cookie cutter and resembling the default examples of Foundation. This is perfectly normal at this stage and exactly what you are going for.

This can also be an opportunity to correct any issues that come up in your user experience. The site at this point is basically a working wireframe or prototype and you can quickly make large sweeping changes at ease.

From a technical standpoint this means you want to use the .medium classes to build out your grid. The only exception is a .medium-12.columns grid. In which case I would recommend using .small-12.columns as best practice.

Try not to add any additional .small or .large classes here. Your goal is to completely build out the entire desktop experience and then refine it later.

> Quick tip: If you are working with stakeholders it is important to clearly communicate that this is just a prototype and that the final site will have professional polish. Sometimes it is difficult for people who are not as involved in the world of ZURB Foundation to recognize the potential and future of your site.

So in this phase what is meant by mobile refinement is to get beyond the basic stacking that you get with a small viewport. From a technical standpoint the .medium grid is basically equal to a .small-12.columns no matter what the setting. This means all of your content is going to stack on top of each other by default.

This is similar to the early days of responsive design and many people don’t go any further. ZURB Foundation 2 and Bootstrap 2.3 worked in this way and you didn’t really have a way to override this behavior.

Before jumping into the specifics you are going to need to simulate a mobile device first. This refinement is going to be covered in the next lesson but we need to have something to work with.

Your homework for this lesson is to take some ideas you have wireframes for (or if you don’t have any, create some or create some from your favorite sites). Use the common patterns from our previous lesson and start building out your Desktop First prototypes.

If any of this seems confusing or you are not sure where to start, hit reply and let me know.

Until next time.

-James Stone, Author of ZURB Foundation Blueprints
